[DOC] Add extra description of the SASL_PLAIN authentication mechanism (#4605)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/modules/oauth/con-oauth-reauthentication.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// assembly-oauth-authentication.adoc

[id='con-oauth-reauthentication-{context}']
= Session re-authentication for Kafka brokers

The _SASL OAUTHBEARER_ authentication mechanism supports a Kafka feature called the _session re-authentication_ mechanism. 

> Session re-authentication is not supported if _SASL_PLAIN_ authentication is used.

Reviewer: There is some nuance to this. And maybe we could better explain it. Re-authentication happens in both cases. `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication` setting sets the maximum session timeout regardless of the mechanism.
The difference between OAUTHBEARER behavior and PLAIN behavior is that for OAUTHBEARER the token expires after some time, and that time takes precedence if shorter than the configured `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication`, whereas for PLAIN the re-authentication is forced at the configured time. The same `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication` config is used for both OAUTHBEARER and PLAIN on the same listener. If `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication` is not set then PLAIN clients can stay connected indefinitely without ever having to re-authenticate.

Author: Thanks for the explanation! I re-worked this module based on your text - please can you check it carefully.

To enable and configure session re-authentication, you set a time value for `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication` in the `oauth` listener configuration for the Kafka broker.

Session re-authentication can be used with _fast local JWT_ or _introspection endpoint_ token validation.

There are some differences in how session expiry is handled in SASL_OAUTHBEARER and SASL_PLAIN authentication.

.Session expiry with OAUTHBEARER

When session re-authentication is configured for SASL_OAUTHBEARER, the broker's authenticated session will expire at the configured `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication`. 
The session will expire earlier if the access token expires before the `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication`. 
The duration of the access token always take precedence over `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication`.

.Session expiry with PLAIN

When session re-authentication is configured with SASL_PLAIN, the broker's authenticated session will expire at the configured `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication`. 
If `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication` is not configured, SASL_PLAIN clients can remain connected to brokers indefinitely, without needing to re-authenticate.

.Client re-authentication

> When the broker's authenticated session expires, the client must re-authenticate to the existing session by sending a new, valid access token to the broker, without dropping the connection.

Reviewer 2: This section seems a bit disconnected. Does it relate to _Session expiry with PLAIN_? Or both _Session expiry with PLAIN_ and _Session expiry with OAUTHBEARER_?

Author: I think this part applies to both OAUTHBEARER and PLAIN.

 @mstruk - Please can you read the updated doc for Session re-authentication and let me know if anything looks out of place.

Do we need more information about _client re-authentication_ when using PLAIN?

Reviewer: Re-authentication is related to the enforcement of session expiry - it allows a new session authentication from the client, effectively the start of a new session by reusing existing connection rather than dropping it. The mechanics is really in the Kafka Client library, not something the client has to explicitly take care of in the code. I see this chapter more as an explanation what's going on in the background for user to better understand the mechanics.

Author: Great info, thanks. I updated the module again based on this text.

Session re-authentication can be used with _fast local JWT_ or _introspection endpoint_ token validation.

.Client re-authentication

When the broker's authenticated session expires, the client must re-authenticate to the existing session by sending a new, valid access token to the broker, without dropping the connection.

If token validation is successful, a new client session is started using the existing connection.
If the client fails to re-authenticate, the broker will close the connection if further attempts are made to send or receive messages.
Java clients that use Kafka client library 2.2 or later automatically re-authenticate if the re-authentication mechanism is enabled on the broker.

.Differences in session expiry for OAUTHBEARER and PLAIN

There are some differences in how session expiry works when session re-authentication is configured for OAUTHBEARER and PLAIN authentication.

* For OAUTHBEARER, the broker's authenticated session will expire at the configured `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication`. 
The session will expire earlier if the access token expires before the `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication`. 

> The duration of the access token always take precedence over `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication`.

Reviewer: This last statement seems to me to sow confusion.
First we say session will expire at the configured time unless the token expires beforehand in which case the session will expire earlier.
Then we say token expiry overrides the configured time - meaning if token lifetime is longer it also overrides the configured time.

If `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication` is not configured, the session will not expire with the expiry of the access token. This is the same as for PLAIN - without `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication` the sessions just don't expire by themselves. 

```suggestion
```

* For PLAIN, the broker's authenticated session will expire at the configured `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication`. 

> If `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication` is not configured, PLAIN clients can remain connected to brokers indefinitely, without needing to re-authenticate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

If `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication` is not configured, OAUTHBEARER and PLAIN clients can remain connected to brokers indefinitely, without needing to re-authenticate. In that case the sessions don't end with access token expiry, but access token expiry can be taken into account when configuring proper authorization. For example by using `keycloak` authorization or installing a custom authorizer.
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// assembly-oauth-authentication.adoc

[id='{context}']
= Session re-authentication for Kafka brokers

> OAuth 2.0 authentication in Strimzi supports _session re-authentication_, which is part of the Kafka Client libraries. 

Reviewer 3: Not sure. Is it this: Strimzi's Kafka Client libraries support session re-athentication for OAuth 2.0 authentication?

Reviewer: That doesn't sound right, rather it is that the listener on the Kafka broker can be configured with re-authentication (you can turn it on using `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication` value greater than 0 - by default it is turned off).
But if enabled on the listener it will only work if client libraries support it. Upstream Kafka client libraries support it.

Author: That sounds much better to me. @mstruk - FYI

> This Kafka mechanism is used to enforce the expiry of authenticated sessions between OAuth clients and Kafka brokers after a defined period of time. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Session re-authentication enforces the expiry of authenticated sessions between OAuth clients and Kafka brokers after a defined period of time. 
```

When a session expires, the client immediately starts a new session by reusing the existing connection rather than dropping it.

Session re-authentication is disabled by default. 
To enable and configure it, you set a time value for `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication` in the `oauth` listener configuration in the `Kafka` custom resource. 
The same property is used to configure session re-authentication for OAUTHBEARER and PLAIN authentication. 
For an example configuration, see xref:proc-oauth-authentication-broker-config-{context}[].

> Session re-authentication can be used with _fast local JWT_ or _introspection endpoint_ token validation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Session re-authentication is used with _fast local JWT_ or _introspection endpoint_ token validation.
```

.Client re-authentication

When the broker's authenticated session expires, the client must re-authenticate to the existing session by sending a new, valid access token to the broker, without dropping the connection.

If token validation is successful, a new client session is started using the existing connection.
If the client fails to re-authenticate, the broker will close the connection if further attempts are made to send or receive messages.
Java clients that use Kafka client library 2.2 or later automatically re-authenticate if the re-authentication mechanism is enabled on the broker.

.Differences in session expiry for OAUTHBEARER and PLAIN

There are some differences in how session expiry works when session re-authentication is configured for OAUTHBEARER and PLAIN authentication.

* For OAUTHBEARER, the broker's authenticated session will expire at the configured `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication`. 

> The session will expire earlier if the access token expires before the `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication`. 

Reviewer 3: What about refresh token?

Reviewer: Refresh token is never sent to the Kafka broker for authentication. It is only saved in Kafka client configuration, when configured, and is used by client to obtain a fresh new access token as needed, which is then sent to the Kafka broker.

Author: @mstruk - Does session re-auth (with OAUTHBEARER) apply to refresh tokens?

Reviewer: Re-authentication is configured and triggered by Kafka broker so it applies to Kafka clients regardless of how they are configured. The refresh token is on the Kafka client. Re-authentication applies. The client refreshes the access token by using the refresh token, and uses the new access token to re-authenticate.

Author: Thanks, well spotted. I added a new part about refresh tokens.

> Session re-authentication also applies to refresh tokens, if used. When the session expires, the client refreshes the access token by using its refresh token. The client then uses the new access token to re-authenticate to the existing session.

> * For PLAIN, the broker's authenticated session will expire at the configured `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication`. 

Reviewer 3: What if PLAIN config uses a long-lived access token?

Reviewer: If the access token expires before the `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication` then the re-authentication is triggered then. However, in that case the client will send an expired token as part of re-authentication because it has no mechanism in PLAIN to refresh the token. As a result the authentication will fail and the client will not be able to continue without configuring a new access token as the password, that is typically a manual step. This is where OAUTHBEARER would have no problem, and using clientId + secret over PLAIN would also have no problem.

Author: I don't think that matters.

Author: OK, I attempted to add an explanation of the behaviour.

> For PLAIN using the long-lived access token method:
> 
> * The broker's authenticated session will expire at the configured `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication`. 
> 
> * Re-authentication will fail if the access token expires before the configured time. Although session re-authentication is attempted, PLAIN has no mechanism for refreshing tokens.

If `maxSecondsWithoutReauthentication` is not configured, OAUTHBEARER and PLAIN clients can remain connected to brokers indefinitely, without needing to re-authenticate. 

> In that case, the sessions do not end with access token expiry, but this can be considered when configuring proper authorization. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this case, the sessions do not end with access token expiry, but this can be considered when configuring proper authorization. 
```

Reviewer 3: Not sure what _but this can be considered when configuring proper authorization._ is trying to say. Or what _proper authorization_ might be.

Author: I may have distorted the meaning. @mstruk - Please can you clarify?

Updated to:

> Authenticated sessions do not end with access token expiry. 
> However, this can be considered when configuring authorization, for example, by using `keycloak` authorization or installing a custom authorizer.
